dfx/README.adoc, before:

= dfx

== Developing

Run `nix-shell` in this directory to bring the right version of `rustc` and
`cargo` into scope. Inside the shell use `cargo` to build and test the Rust
packages (crates).

== Documentation

https://hydra.oregon.dfinity.build/latest/dfinity-ci-build/sdk/dfinity-sdk.dfx.doc.x86_64-linux/dfx/index.html[Latest cargo docs].

== CI

To run the CI job manually either run:

`nix-build ci/ci.nix -A dfinity-sdk.dfx[.x86_64-linux|.x86_64-darwin]`

== Dependencies

=== Licenses

https://hydra.oregon.dfinity.build/latest/dfinity-ci-build/sdk/dfinity-sdk.licenses.dfx.x86_64-linux/licenses.dfinity-sdk-dfx.html[Latest licenses of all dependencies of dfx (build for x86_64-linux)].

=== Visualization

https://hydra.oregon.dfinity.build/latest/dfinity-ci-build/sdk/dfinity-sdk.dfx.x86_64-linux/dfx/cargo-graph.svg[Access the latest graph of dependencies between crates of the `dfx` crate (build for x86_64-linux)].

To build and visualize this graph locally run:

`open $(nix-build -A dfinity-sdk.dfx.doc)/dfx/cargo-graph.svg`

Commit message:

dfx README: Indicate which derivation is the final build (#159)
instead of complaining on slack about lack of documentation, let me just
propose fixes. This would have helped me to find what I was looking for.

dfx/README.adoc, after:

= dfx

== Developing

Run `nix-shell` in this directory to bring the right version of `rustc` and
`cargo` into scope. Inside the shell use `cargo` to build and test the Rust
packages (crates).

== Installing from source

If you want to install `dfx` from source via nix, you can run, in the top level directory,

[source,bash]
nix-env -iA rust-workspace-standalone -f .

To create the tarball that would be uploaded as part of a release, run

[source,bash]
nix-build -A pkgs.dfinity-sdk.dfx-release

and look in `result/dfx-latest.tar.gz`.

== Documentation

https://hydra.oregon.dfinity.build/latest/dfinity-ci-build/sdk/dfinity-sdk.dfx.doc.x86_64-linux/dfx/index.html[Latest cargo docs].

== CI

To run the CI job manually either run:

`nix-build ci/ci.nix -A dfinity-sdk.dfx[.x86_64-linux|.x86_64-darwin]`

== Dependencies

=== Licenses

https://hydra.oregon.dfinity.build/latest/dfinity-ci-build/sdk/dfinity-sdk.licenses.dfx.x86_64-linux/licenses.dfinity-sdk-dfx.html[Latest licenses of all dependencies of dfx (build for x86_64-linux)].

=== Visualization

https://hydra.oregon.dfinity.build/latest/dfinity-ci-build/sdk/dfinity-sdk.dfx.x86_64-linux/dfx/cargo-graph.svg[Access the latest graph of dependencies between crates of the `dfx` crate (build for x86_64-linux)].

To build and visualize this graph locally run:

`open $(nix-build -A dfinity-sdk.dfx.doc)/dfx/cargo-graph.svg`
